# Review Questions
1. What are the main advantages of theoretical analysis?
2. Sort the following functions in increasing order of growth: 2n2, 6 log n, 0.6 n3, 2n log n, 34
3. Count the number of operations for algorithm linearSearch and find T(n).
4. Describe the main approach of theoretical analysis.
5. Discuss the differences among the different types of asymptotic notation.
6. Why do you think binarySearch’s running time is O(log n)?
7. Show that T(n) = 3n2 – 4n + 32 is O(n2), (n2) (n2)? Is it O(n3) Or (n log n)?
8. Do the same for 0.2 log n – 8 n log n + 4 n3
9. What are the main methods for proofs/justifications for asymptotic notation? Give an
example of each method.
10. Consider a problem. Write two algorithms for which the best-case and worst-case running
times are different.
# Answer Key
1. The main advantages of theoretical analysis are:
- That is uses a high level description of an algorithm instead of an implementation specific description
- Characterizes input as size n
- Takes into account all inputs
- Allows us to evaluate speed regardless of hardware and software
2. The sorted functions in order of growth are:
- 6 log(n), 34, 2n log n, 2n^2, 0.6n^3
3. The primitive operations in linearSearch are:
- `i=0;` Assigning the variable i to integer 0 is 1 operation
- `while i < n and S[i] != k;` This compares i with n, indexes i in array S and compares it with variable k, this line has three primitive operations and will run n times. The operation time is 3n.
- `i = i + 1` This will run 2(n-1) times because it will first check if i < n
- `if i = n then` This line compares i to n. This is one primitive operation.
- `return null` This operation time is 1 because it simply returns a value. However this branch isn't considered because the next two lines take more time
- `else`
- `e = S[i]` Indexing i and assigning it to e takes two units of time
- `return e` Returning the value of e takes 1 unit of time
- Therefore T(n) = 5n + 2 and the algorithm runs in O(n) time
4. The main approach of theoretical analysis is:
- Define the Problem: Clearly define the problem the algorithm is intended to solve.
- Design the Algorithm: Create an algorithm to solve the problem, considering various approaches.
- Analyze Algorithm: Analyze the algorithm's time and space complexity to understand its theoretical performance.
- Worst-Case Analysis: Focus on worst-case scenarios to provide performance guarantees.
- Asymptotic Analysis: Express complexity in terms of big O notation to describe how it scales with input size.
5. Big-Oh is worst case analysis time Big-Omega is best case analysis and Big-Theta is average case analysis 