# Chapter 4 Probability and Probability Distributions

## Learning Objectives

- After this chapter, you should know and be able to explain:
- What are experiments, simple events, events, and sample space.
- What is the probability of an event.
- Relative frequency and its relationship with probability of an event.
- Counting rules: rule, extended rule, permutations rule, combinations rule.
- Relationships among events: intersection, union, complement.
- Probability rules: conditional probability, additive and multiplicative rules of probability.
- Relations among events: mutually exclusive, dependence, independence.
- Probability distributions for discrete random variables.
- Mean, variance and standard deviation of a discrete random variable and how to compute them.

## Experiment - Coin Toss

- Suppose after a coin toss we observe one of two values heads (H) or tails (T)
- The act of tossing the coin is our experiment
- Each possible outcome of tossing the coin is a simple event
- The collection of all simple events that could occur is called the sample space
- An event is one or more simple events

## Experiment - Vehicle Safety

- Suppose we “randomly” choose a Canadian child traveling in a vehicle and record whether they were restrained correctly
- The operation of choosing a child and recording a value of 1 if they were restrained in the correct seat or 0 otherwise is the experiment.
- The experiment has two outcomes (correct, incorrect) labelled as 1 and 0, respectively, and these are the simple events.
- The sample space in this experiment is made up of two simple event(correct and incorrect, or 1 and 0).

## Mutually Exclusive Events

- Two events are mutually exclusive if when one event occurs the other cannot and, vice versa

## Requirements for simple events

- Each probability must lie within 0 and 1
- If it's 0 then event A can never occur
- If it's 1 then event A always occurs
- The sum of all simple events is 1
- The probability of an event is the sum of all it's simple events

## Useful Counting Rule

- The probability of an event A is the number of simple events in A divided by the total number of simple events

## The mn Rule

- If an experiment is performed in two stages, with m ways to accomplish the first stage and n ways to accomplish the second stage, then there exits mn ways to accomplish the experiment

- For example tossing three coins has two simple events in each step. That would yield a total number of 8 simple events fro the experiment

- 36 Simple events for tossing two siz sided dice

## Permutation and Combination Rules

- The number of ways you can arrange n distinct objects taking them r at a time is n factorial over n minus r factorial

- the number of combinations is similar except that the denominator is multiplied by r factorial

## Bear Example 

- Suppose there are N = 50 bears in the vicinity of a town in Alberta, M = 20 of which are Grizzly Bears. If we randomly sampled m = 10 bears out of these 50, what would be the probability that 4 out of these 10 would be Grizzly Bears?

- We can break this down into the ways of choosing 10 bears out of 50 where 4 are from the population of 20 grizzlies 

- Over the number of ways of choosing 10 bears out of 50 where we don't care about the makeup of our sample

- The ways of choosing 10 bears out of 50 is calculated by using the combination rule with n=50 and r=10

- Then there is a combination of 20 choose 4 possible ways to choose 4 bears from 20 grizzlies and for the remaining 30 bears it's 30 choose 6 ways of choosing the 6 remaining bears from a population of 30

## Probability for Unions

- For any event A and B the probability of A or B is the sum of the probabilities of A and B minus the probability of A & B

- Probability of complement A is 1 minus the probability of A

